So far we've developed a divide and
conquer approach to count the number
of inversions of an array.
So we're going to split
the array in two parts,
recursively count inversions on the left,
on the right.
We've identified the key challenge
is counting the number of split
inversions quickly.
Where a split inversion means that
the earlier indexes on the left half of
the array, the second index is
on the right half of the array.
These are precisely inversions that
are going to be missed by both
of our recursive calls.
And the cracks or the problem is that
there might be as many as quadratics but
conversions.
It somehow they go the run time they want.
We need to do it in a linear time.
So, here is the really nice idea
which is going to let us do that.
The idea is to piggy back on merge sort.
By which I mean we're actually going to
demand a bit more of our recursive calls
to make the job of counting the number
of split recursions easier.
This is analogous to when you're
doing a proof by induction,
sometimes making the inductive
hypothesis stronger,
that's what lets you push
through the inductive proof.
So we're going to ask our recursive calls
to not only count inversions in the array
that they're passed, but
also along the way to sort the array.
And hey, why not?
We know sorting is fast.
Merge sort will do it in n log in time,
which is the run time we're shooting for,
so why not just throw that in?
Maybe it'll help us in the combined step,
and as we'll see, it will.
So, what is this bias,
why should we demand more recursive calls?
Well, as we'll see in a couple of slides,
the merge subroutine
almost seem designed just to count
the number of split inversions.
As we'll see,
as you merge two sorted sub arrays,
you will naturally uncover,
all of the split inversions.
So, let me just be a little bit more
clear about how our previous high level
algorithm is going to now be souped up so
that the recursive calls sort, as well.
So, here is the high level algorithm we
proposed before where we just recursively
counted versions on the left side,
on the right side.
And then, we have some currently
unimplemented subroutine counts splint if
which is responsible for
counting the number of split inversions.
So we're just going to
augment this as follows so
instead of being called count now
we're going to call it sort and count.
That's going to be
the name of our algorithm.
The recursive calls, again,
just invoke sort and count.
And so now we know each of those will not
only count the number of inversions in sub
array, but also return a sorted version.
So, out from the first one we're going to
get arrayed B back which is the sorted
version of the array that we past it and
we got the sorted array C back from
the second recursive call or sort of
version of the array that we past it.
And now, the counts split inversions now,
in addition to count and split inversions
is responsible for merging the two
sort of subarrays, B and C.
So CountSplitInv will be responsible for
outputting an array D, which is a sorted
version of the original input array A.
And so I should also rename our
unimplemented subroutine to reflect its
now more ambitious agenda.
So we'll call this mergeAndCountSplitInv.
Now, we shouldn't be intimidated by
asking our combining subroutine to
merge the two sorted subarrays B and
C, because we've already seen,
we know how to do that in linear time.
So the question is just,
piggybacking on that worth,
can we also count the number of split
inversions in an additional linear time?
We'll see that we can,
although that's certainly not obvious.
So you should again at this point have
the question why are we doing this?
Why are we just making
ourselves do more work?
And again the hope is that the payoff is
somehow counting split inversions becomes
easier by asking our recursive calls to
give some additional work of sorting.
So to develop some intuition for
why that's true.
Why merging naturally uncovers
the number of splits inversions.
Let's recall with just the definition
of the original merge subroutine from
merge sort was.
So here's the same pseudocode we
went through several videos ago.
I have renamed the letters of
the arrays to be consistent with
the current notation.
So we're given two sorted subarrays.
These come back from a recursive calls.
I'm calling them B and C.
They both have length n/2 and
were responsible for
producing the sorted combination of B and
C so that's an output array D of length n.
And again the ideas simple, you just take
the two sorted sub-arrays B and C and
then you take the output array D which
you're responsible for populating.
And using an index k you're going to
traverse the output D from left to right.
That's what this outer form here does and
you're going to maintain pointers i and
j to the sorted sub arrays B and
C respectively.
And, the only observation is that whatever
the minimum element that you haven't
copied over to D yet is, it's got to be
either the left most element of B that
you haven't seen yet or the left most
element of C that you haven't seen yet.
B and C by virtue of being sorted,
the minimum element remaining has to be
the next one available to either B or C.
So you just proceed in the obvious way.
You compare the two candidates for
the next ones that copy over.
You look at B(i).
You look at C(j).
Whichever one is smaller,
you copy over, so
the first part of the if statement is for
when B contains the smaller one.
The second part of the else statement is
for when C contains the smaller one, okay?
So, that's how merge works.
You go down B and C in parallel,
populating D in sorted
order from left to right.
Now to get some feel for
what on Earth any of this has to do
with the split inversions of an array,
I want you to think about an input array
A that has the following property.
That has the property that there
are no split inversions whatsoever.
So every inversion in this input array A
is going to be either a left inversion, so
both indices are at most n/2,
or a right end version.
So both indexes are strictly
greater than n/2.
Now, the question is,
given such an array A,
once you're merging at this step,
what do the assorted subarrays B and
C look like for an input array
that has no split inversions?
The correct answer is the second one.
That if you have an array with no split
inversions then everything in the first
half is less than everything
in the second half, why?
Well, consider the contra-positive.
Suppose you had even one element in
the first half which was bigger than
any element in the second half,
that pair of elements alone would
constitute a split inversion, okay?
So if you have no split inversions then
everything on the left is smaller than
everything in the right half of the array.
Now, more to the point, think about
the execution of the merge subroutine
on an array with this property,
on an input array A where
everything in the left half is less
than everything in the right half.
What is merge going to do?
All right,
just remember it's always looking for
whichever is smaller the first
element of remaining in B or
the first element remaining in C and
that's what it copies over.
When everything in B is less than
everything in C everything in
B is going to get copied over in to the
output array D before C ever gets touched.
Okay, so merge has an unusually trivial
execution on input arrays with no split
inversions with zero split inversions
First it just goes through B and
copies it over then it just concatinate C.
Okay, there's no interweaving
between the two.
So, no split in versions means nothing it
copied from C, until it absolutely has to,
until B is exhausted.
So, this suggests that, perhaps, copying
elements over from the second sub-array
C has something to do with the number of
split inversions in the original array,
and that is in fact the case.
So we're going to see a general pattern
about copies from the second array C
through the output array, exposing split
inversions in the original input array A.
So let's look at a more detailed
example to see what that pattern is.
So let's return to the example
in the previous video,
which is an array with six elements,
ordered 1, 3, 5, 2, 4, 6.
So we do our recursive call and in fact,
the left half of the array is sorted and
the right half of the array
is already sorted.
No sorting was going to be done and
I'm actually going to get zero
inversions for both our recursive calls.
Remember in this example it turns out all
of the inversions are split versions.
So now let's trace through
the merge sub routine invoked
on these two sorted subarrays.
And try to spot a connection with
the number of split inversions in
the original six element array.
So we initialize indices i and
j to point to the first element
of each of these subarrays.
So this left one is B and
this right one is C and the output is D.
And the first thing we do is
we copy the 1 over from B into
the top of array so 1 goes there and
we advance this index over to the 3.
And here,
nothing really interesting happens,
there's no reason to count
on this split inversions and
indeed the number one is not involved at
any split inversions, because you want it
smaller than all of the other elements and
it's also in the first index.
Things are much more
interesting when we copy over
the element 2 from the second array C.
And notice, at this point, we have
diverged from the trivial execution that
we would see with an array
with no split inversions.
Now we're copying over something from
C before we've exhausted copying B.
So we are hoping this will
expose some split inversions.
So we copy over the two and
we advance the second pointer j into C and
the thing to notice is,
this exposes two split inversions.
The two split inversions that
involve the element two.
And those inversions are 3,2 and 5,2.
So why did this happen?
Well the reason we copied two
over is because it's smaller than
all the elements we haven't yet
looked at in both B and C.
So in particular 2 is smaller than the
remaining elements in B, the 3 and the 5.
But also because B is the left array,
the indices of the 3 and the 5 have
to be less than the index of this 2.
So, these are inversions, 2 is further to
the right in the original input array, and
yet it's smaller than these
remaining elements in B.
So, there are two elements remaining in B,
and
those are the two split versions
that involve the elements two.
So, now let's go back to the merging
subroutines, and what happens next.
Well, next we'll make a copy from the
first array and we sort of realize that
nothing really interesting happens
when we copy it from the first array,
at least with respect
to split in versions.
Then we copy the four over, and yet again,
we discover a split inversion,
the remaining one, which is 5,4.
Again, the reason is, given that 4 was
copied over before what's left in B,
it's got to be smaller than it, but
by virtue of being in the rightmost array,
it's also not going to have a bigger
index, so it's gotta be a split inversion.
Now the rest of the merge subroutines
executes without any real incident.
Five gets copied over and we know copies
from the left array are boring and
then we copy the six over and copies from
the right array are generally interesting
but not if the left array is empty.
That doesn't involve any split versions.
And you will recall from the earlier video
that these were the inversions in your
original array, 3252 and 54.
We discovered them all on
an automated method by just
keeping an eye out when we
copy from the right array C.
So this is indeed a general principle so
let me state the general claim.
So, the claim is not just in this specific
example, in this specific execution.
But no matter what the inquiry is,
no matter how many split inversion
there might be, the split inversions that
involve an element of the second half of
the array are precisely those
elements remaining in the first array
when that element gets copied
over to the output array.
So this is exactly the pattern
that we saw in the example.
What were, so on the right array C,
we have the elements two, four and six.
Remember every split version has to,
by definition,
involve one element from the first half
and one element from the second half.
So the count for split inversions,
we can just group them according to
which element of the second
array that they involve.
So out of the two four and six,
the two is involved in the split up
inversions three two and five two.
The three and
the five were exactly the elements
remaining in B when we copied over two.
The split inversions involving four is
exactly the inversion five, four and
five is exactly the element
that was remaining.
In B when we copied over the four, there's
no split inversions involving six and
indeed, the element B was empty when we
copied the six over in the output array D.
So what's the general argument?
Well it's quite simple.
Let's just zoom in and
fixate on a particular element x that
belongs to that first half of that array.
That's amongst the first
half of the element.
And let's just examine which y's, so which
elements of the second array, the second
half of the original input array,
are involved in split inversions with x.
So there are two cases,
depending on whether x is copied over into
the output array D before or after y.
Now if x is copied to the output before y,
well
then since the output's in sorted order
it means x has got to be less than y so
there's not going to be
any split inversion.
On the other hand if y is
copied to the output d before
x then again because we populate
the left to right in sorted order,
that's got to mean that y is less than x.
Now x is still hanging out in the left
array so it has a less index than y,
y comes from the right array so
it's not a split inversion.
So putting these two together,
it says that the elements x of the array
B that form split inversions with y
are precisely those that are going to
get copied to the output array after y.
So those are exactly the number
of elements remaining in B
when y gets copied over.
So that proves the general claim.
So this slide was really the key insight.
Now that we understand exactly why
counting split inversions is easy,
as we're merging together two sorted
subarrays, it's a simple matter to
just translate this into code and
get a linear time of notation
of a sub routine that both emerges and
counts the number of split inversions.
Which then in the overall course of the
algorithm we'll have n log n running time
just as in merge sort.
So, let's just spend a quick
minute filling in those details.
So, I'm not going to
write up the pseudo code.
I'm just going to write what you need
to augment the merge pseudo code
discussed a few slides ago by in order to
count split inversion as
you're doing the merging.
And this will follow immediately from
the previous plan which indicated
how split version relate to the number
of elements remaining in the left array
as you're doing the merge.
So the idea is the natural one,
as you're doing the merging,
according to the previous pseudo code,
of the two sorted subarrays you
just keep a running total of the number
of split inversions that you encounter.
And so you've got your sorted subarray B,
you've got your sorted subarray C.
You're merging these into
an output array D, and
as you traverse through D and k goes from
1 to n, you just start out at zero and
increment it by something each time
you copy over from either B or C.
So, what's the increment?
Well, what did we just see,
we saw the copies involving B don't count,
we're not going to look at split
inversions when to copy over from B,
only when we look at them from C, right?
Every split inversion involves exactly
one element from each of B and C.
So, I may as well count them
via the elements in C and
how many split inversions are involved
with the given element of C,
well it's exactly how many elements
of B remain when it gets copied over.
So, that tells us how to
increment this running count.
And, it follows immediately from
the claim on the previous slide that this
implementation of this running
total counts precisely the number
of split inversions that the original
input array A possesses.
And we'll call that the left inversions
are counted by the first recursive
call of the right inversions are counted
by the second recursive call.
Every inversion is either at left or
right or
splitt that's exactly one
of those three types.
So, with our three different subroutines,
the two recursive ones and this one here,
we successfully count of all the
inversions of the original input array.
So that's the correctness
of the algorithm.
What's the running time?
We'll recall in mergesort, we began just
by analyzing the running time of merge and
then we discussed the running time
of the entire mergesort algorithm.
Let's do the same thing here briefly.
So what's the running time of
the subroutine for this merging and
simultaneously counting
the number of split inversions?
Well there's the work that
we do in the merging, and
we already know that that's linear.
And then the only additional work here
is incrementing this running count,
and that's constant time for
each element of D, right?
Each time we do a copy over we do some
single addition to our running count.
So constant time for element of D,
or linear time over all.
So, I'm being a little sloppy here.
Sloppy in a very conventional way but
it is a little sloppy by
writing O(n) + O(n) = O(n).
Be careful when you make
statements like that.
Right, so, if you added O(n) to
itself n times, it would not be O(n),
but if you add O(n) to itself a constant
number of times, it is still O(n).
So you might, as an exercise,
want to write out a formal
version of what this means.
Basically there's some constant c1 so that
the merge steps takes at most c1 n steps.
There's a constant c2 so that the rest
of the work is at most c2 times n steps.
So when you add them, we get it's at
most quantity c1 plus c2 times n steps,
which is still big O(n),
because c1 plus c2 Is a constant, okay?
So, linear work for merge,
linear work for the running count, so
does linear work in
the subroutine overall.
And now, by exactly the same argument,
we'll use in merge sort because we have
two reversing calls in half the size.
And with your linear work
outside the recursive calls,
the overall running time is O(n) log n.
So, it really just piggybacked
on merge sort upped to
the constant factor a little bit to
do the counting along the way, but
the running time remains
the big O(n log n).